=head1 NAME

B<Helios> - a distributed job processing system

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Helios is a system for building asynchronous distributed job processing 
applications.  Applications that need to process hundreds, thousands, even 
millions of small units of work in parallel can use the Helios system to 
distribute your workload across the multiple processes and servers that form 
a Helios collective.  Helios may also be used to improve the user experience 
on websites.  By utilizing the framework's APIs, potential timeout issues can 
be eliminated and response times decreased for larger tasks invoked in response 
to user input.  The web server application can "fire and forget" to the 
background, immediately returning control to the user.  Using Helios, simple 
Perl applications can be written to distribute massive workloads throughout 
the Helios collective while still retaining centralized management.

=head1 REQUIREMENTS

Helios requires:

=over 4

=item * A Unix/Linux-style OS 

=item * Perl 5.8.8 or later

=item * MySQL or Oracle database

=item * Apache or other CGI-capable web server for web admin console (packaged 
separately) and job submission via HTTP (if needed)

=back

=head1 INSTALLATION

See the INSTALL.* files included in this distribution for specific 
installation instructions for various databases and operating systems.

=head1 AUTHOR

Andrew Johnson, E<lt>lajandy at cpan dotorgE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHTS AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2012-4 by Logical Helion, LLC.

Copyright (C) 2007-9 CEB Toolbox, Inc.

For full copyright information, see the README file included in this 
distribution.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself, either Perl version 5.8.0 or,
at your option, any later version of Perl 5 you may have available.

See the LICENSE file included in this distribution for more details.

=head1 WARRANTY

This software comes with no warranty of any kind.

=cut

